Add Git and GitHub section to SOP (#52)
emlab-ucsb/SOP: 04-gh/01-setup.qmd

If you already have Git for Windows but want to update it:

```bash
git update-git-for-windows
```
### Linux

Install via your distribution's package manager:

```bash
# Ubuntu or Debian
sudo apt-get install git

# Fedora or RedHat
sudo yum install git
```

For other distributions, see [git-scm.com/download/linux](https://git-scm.com/download/linux).

### Configuring git after installation

Once git is installed, tell it your name and email address. These appear in every commit you make:

```bash
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global user.email "you@example.com"
```

Use the email address associated with your GitHub account.

## Creating a GitHub account

If you do not already have a GitHub account, create one at [github.com](https://github.com). Use an email address you will have long-term access to, since your GitHub account can persist beyond your time at emLab.

## Joining the emLab GitHub organization

All emLab repositories live under the [emlab-ucsb](https://github.com/emlab-ucsb) organization on GitHub. Send Erin O'Reilly a Slack message to request an invitation. You will receive an email from GitHub with a link to accept.

### Base permissions

> Once you join the emlab GitHub organization, you have **read** access to all repositories in the organization by default. If you create a new repository in the organization, you will automatically have **admin** access and can grant additional permissions to specific team members on a per-repository basis. If you need write access to a repository and do not have it, ask the repository admin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you join the emlab GitHub organization, you have **read** access to all repositories in the organization by default. If you create a new repository in the organization, you will automatically have **admin** access and can grant additional permissions to specific team members or outside collaborators on a per-repository basis. If you need write access to a repository and do not have it, ask the repository admin.
```

Organization owners can manage team membership and repository permissions through the organization's **People** and **Teams** settings pages on GitHub.

## Authenticating with GitHub

To push and pull code between your local machine and GitHub, you need to authenticate. Git can communicate with GitHub over two protocols -- HTTPS and SSH -- and the credentials differ between them.

**HTTPS with a personal access token (PAT) is the recommended starting point**, and is what GitHub itself recommends. It is easier to get working quickly on all platforms and has the added benefit that the same credential works for R packages that call GitHub's API (e.g., `usethis`, `gh`, `pak`). SSH is a fine alternative once you are more comfortable with the tooling, and some people prefer it. You can always switch protocols later, and even mix them across different repositories or computers.

Note that GitHub no longer accepts your account password for command-line git operations. You must use a PAT (for HTTPS) or an SSH key pair.

### HTTPS: personal access token

#### Generate a PAT

> The easiest way to generate a PAT is from R:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The recommended way to generate a PAT is from R:^[this requires the `usethis` package, which can be installed from the R terminal with `install.packages("usethis")`
```

I would consider adding an alternative suggestion that doesn't require installing an R package first. The [classic option](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens#creating-a-personal-access-token-classic) from GitHub documentation is probably easiest.

Author: Good idea, added!

```r
usethis::create_github_token()
```

This opens a pre-filled GitHub form with recommended scopes already selected (`repo`, `user`, `gist`, `workflow`). Review the scopes, give the token a descriptive name that identifies the computer or project it is for (e.g., `"work-macbook-pro"`), and set an expiration. GitHub recommends accepting the default 30-day expiration; you will regenerate it on that schedule, which also gives you a chance to verify the scopes are still appropriate.

Click "Generate token" and copy it immediately -- you will not be able to see it again after leaving the page. If you use a password manager like 1Password, store it there as well.

#### Store the PAT

> Once you have a token, store it in your system's credential store using `gitcreds`:

Reviewer: note: `gitcreds` is installed as a dependency of `usethis` as of v2.

4. Create an initial file (like a `README.md` or `.gitignore`), stage it, and make your first commit in the Source Control panel.

### In RStudio

1. Go to `File > New Project...`
2. Choose `New Directory`, then `New Project`.
3. Choose a directory name and subdirectory.
4. Check the box for `Create a git repository`.
5. Click `Create Project`. RStudio will initialize the repo and restart itself within the new project.

## Cloning an existing repository

To work on an existing emLab project, you will need to "clone" it, which downloads a local copy of the repository to your machine and links it to the remote version on GitHub.

### Step 1: Copy the repository URL from GitHub

1. Navigate to the repository on GitHub (e.g., under the `emlab-ucsb` organization).
2. Click the green `Code` button in the upper right.
3. Select the `SSH` tab (if you set up SSH keys) or the `HTTPS` tab (if you set up a PAT).
4. Click the `Copy` icon next to the URL.

  - An SSH URL will look like: `git@github.com:emlab-ucsb/repo-name.git`

  - An HTTPS URL will look like: `https://github.com/emlab-ucsb/repo-name.git`

### Step 2: Clone the repository into your IDE

#### In Positron

> 1. Go to `File > New Folder from Git...` (or click the New dropdown menu and select New Folder from Git...).

Reviewer: If Positron retained the VS Code functionality, clicking this button will bring up a searchable list of repositories that your account has access to on GitHub. That eliminates the need for Step 1. I don't know if this is worth mentioning or an unnecessary distraction. It is definitely nice to clone repos straight from VS Code without switching apps.

Author: Ooooo that's neat. Positron doesn't have that feature (neither does RStudio), but hopefully they will add it!
